Hello, I'm Jiyoung Seo, a doctoral student in Learning Design Technology program at Penn
State, and I was one of the interns at RStudio in 2020.
I've been using R without sight, because I'm blind.
Yeah, I understand that you might have a big question mark in mind.
How a blind person could do data science, or even use computer?
In this talk, I will answer the fundamental questions that you might have by demonstrating
some strategies that I've used, plus by introducing some accessibility improvements made for RStudio
IDE and Shiny that I was involved in for my internship.
Okay, let's get started.
Before talking about R and data science, let me address this question first.
How do I use computer?
Well, I need to ask you back, then how do you use your computer?
In other words, how do you interact with computer?
We could break down the way we interact with computer into input and output.
That is, how we pass information to computer, and how we get information from computer.
What if we would remove visual aspect from the two modes of interactions?
Undoubtedly, using mouse would become almost impossible, or even useless.
I doubt no one could point and double click RStudio icon on their desktop in a stable
fashion when blindfolded, but you can still use keyboard as long as your muscle memory
remembers your keyboard layout.
What about output?
We need some workarounds alternative to visual monitor.
How about using sound output instead?
I use computer via keyboard-only input and sound and tactile output, just like this.
Isn't it too fast for you?
No worries, let me slow it down for you.
Now that you got how I interact with computer, let's talk about data science.
Data science involves a cycle of interaction with data, such as importing, tidying, transforming,
visualizing, and modeling.
And it feels like data science is highly vision-dominant.
Yes, it could be.
But data science is more than what is seen.
If data science was restricted to only vision domain, that would mean that people who cannot
employ vision sense can't do data science at all.
Very fortunately, however, that is not true, because we have R, which enables blind people
see data beyond visual models.
I believe R is one of the most accessible data science environments because of the following
benefits.
First, command line interface.
As opposed to point-and-click graphical user interface, which requires mouse input interaction,
R is a command line environment.
This means that you can do everything within terminal using keyboard only.
This is a good benefit for keyboard users like me.
Second, the beautiful interplay between reproducibility and accessibility.
R Markdown is a plain text-based document for reproducible report that can be written
with any text editor and can be rendered into multiple formats, including HTML, Word, PDF,
EPUB, and more.
These outputs, in many cases, are made readily accessible to assistive technologies.
Especially, the HTML output is super accessible.
Last but not least, there are a number of accessible packages out there, thanks to its
open-source nature.
There are two either accessible or semi-accessible integrated development environments supporting
R programming.
One is RStudio IDE, version 1.3 or later.
The other one is Visual Studio Code with some extensions for R.
It was such an honor for me to be part of the RStudio accessibility project for my summer
2020 internship, under the great double mentorship of Gary Ritchie on RStudio team and Winston
Chang on Shiny team.
Since RStudio has just started its accessibility support, there are still rooms for further
improvements, but we can at least recommend trying out RStudio Server for keyboard or
screen reader users to benefit from its accessibility enhancements.
As RStudio Server requires Linux system, Windows users need virtual technology called Windows
subsystem for Linux, and we published the technical details for this.
Just check it out.
Here are some accessibility options currently supported in RStudio Server version 1.3 or
higher.
We have added screen reader support, animation reduction, tab key focus control, etc.
And previously, it was very challenging for keyboard users to move their focus around,
but now you can get your focus moved around by pressing tab key from menu bar all the
way down to workbench area.
You can send any inquiries or suggestions directly to accessibility at rstudio.com.
Now it's time to introduce some accessible and useful R packages that I've used.
I used GT when interacting with DataFrame and other tidy data table, and I used Sonify
for two-dimensional scatterplot or line charts.
Braille R package is very useful for understanding histogram, bar plot, and box plot.
Shiny, it used to be not very accessible, but it's getting accessible.
So of course, I use it for interactive data science work.
R Markdown is such an accessible Swiss army knife because you can do almost everything
possible in R and turn it into accessible outputs.
All right, let me walk you through each of them from how I interact with DataFrame.
I assume view is one of the most widely used basic functions among R users to get a better
sense of DataFrame structure.
Unfortunately, the default data viewer called from urls package is completely inaccessible.
This means that screen reader does not read anything for you from the default pane.
RStudio has replaced this default one with their one enhanced data viewer, which is accessible.
However, that's not universal solution for those who do not use RStudio IDE.
My simple go-to is GT, developed by Rich and Joe.
GT stands for grammar of tables, and it has a lot of number of good features that helps
you create nice looking tables.
But I use its core function, GT colon colon GT in lieu of data viewer.
Why I use this?
Because it generates and opens on HTML table, which is fully screen reader accessible and
keyboard users.
Next, I'll talk about how I interpret two dimensional scatter plot.
On the left hand side, we have a simple scatter plot with x and y axes.
How would you be able to represent this visualization in a way that blind people could also digest?
How about using sound?
Say for example, we could represent values on x-axis using stereo panning sound from
left to right.
And we could map y-axis values with different pitch.
Data points that are higher on the graph have a higher pitch.
Data points that are lower on the graph have corresponding lower pitch.
Just take a listen.
It makes sense, doesn't it?
This technique that represents data using sound is called sonification.
I use data sonification alternative to data visualization.
We can also try this out with sonify package developed by Stephan Siegert and Robin Williams.
Next, I will show you how I interact with histogram.
Here is a visual histogram.
How could we make it accessible to people who are blind?
Yes, of course, we can use data sonification again by mapping x and y-axis to sounds.
But I would like to introduce another way of data representation this time.
That is using text description.
The braille R package developed by Jonathan Guthrie has a function that translates some
R graphs into alternative text description.
You can call this function by vi, which stands for vision impairment.
This package is currently available on GitHub that you can install via remote colon colon
install on the bar GitHub function.
For box plot interaction, we can apply the same method to this visualization.
Just like this.
I know we got a quite long description this time, but it's cool that we can have auto-generated
alt text for some basic R graphs.
If you are an R developer, please help Jonathan Guthrie on GitHub to support more types of
graphs.
Okay, I want to turn into accessible math content interaction.
I kept mentioning that R Markdown contributes to accessibility.
One of the most pleasant supports is accessible math.
For HTML output, R Markdown uses MathJax JS library by default for latex math expressions.
And this is rendered into accessible math markup language content that is fully accessible
with modern screen readers.
I'm going to talk a little bit about Shiny.
I'm super excited to announce that Shiny is getting accessible.
With the amazing support of Winston, Carson, Barrett, and other Shiny team members, I was
working for making Shiny accessible for my internship activity at RStudio.
As a result, you will see many accessibility improvements in the next Shiny release, version
1.6 or higher.
If you want to test the development version, that's available on GitHub, and you can install
it through remote package.
Some significant improvements are as follows.
First, we've added PayPal's bootstrap accessibility plugin under the hood.
So alert, tooltip, popover, model dialogue, dropdown, tab panel, collapse, and carousel
elements are made keyboard accessible.
Next, there are many significant improvements made for Shiny widgets.
Select input, especially selectize input, file input are now fully keyboard accessible.
Font awesome and glyphic icon now produces appropriate labels based on icon names for
screen readers.
Media buttons and checkbox group input are properly grouped together for assistive technologies.
Date input and date range input are properly labeled.
And now dynamic contents within all the output and update input are auto announced to screen
readers and refreshable bread display.
There are also some great enhancements for semantic accessibility.
We can pass alt text to render plot function to specify alternative text description for
screen readers.
It could be a static text.
Not object is given by default.
Or you can even use reactive function for alt term to create dynamic text that is useful
when you want to create reactive alt text in response to user input.
And you can explicitly set the lang code, language code, used within your Shiny app
by passing lang parameter to float page function.
This helps search engine parsers and assistive tech better identify document language.
Last but not least, semantic landmarks have been applied to main panel as well as sidebar
panel for screen readers to quickly navigate through Shiny apps in a logical manner.
It's time to close my talk.
I have touched upon some fundamental questions that you might have.
How could a blind person do computer?
And how could a blind person do data science?
As my presentation title suggests, we can make data science accessible beyond visual
models because data science requires insight, not sight.
And all is possible with R.
According to the World Health Organization's 2018 report, globally, more than 1.3 billion
people have some varying degree of visual impairment and 36 million of whom are blind.
I'm just one of them.
Why not we invite more people with diverse abilities to use R and to enjoy data sciencing?
Thank you.